---
title: "How to Decide Whether to Build, Buy or Blend Your AI Projects"
source: "https://www.gartner.com/document-reader/document/6344979?ref=solrResearch&refval=503640287&"
author:
published:
created: 2025-10-22
description: "Determining whether to buy, blend or build AI starts with defining the project’s strategic and tactical focus. CIOs can use this research to determine the strategic driver behind their AI use case and weigh key factors that will determine which approach is best."
tags:
  - "clippings"
---
Determining whether to buy, blend or build AI starts with defining the project’s strategic and tactical focus. CIOs can use this research to determine the strategic driver behind their AI use case and weigh key factors that will determine which approach is best.

## Overview

---

### Key Findings

- An ever-growing collection of proposed AI use cases gathers on CIOs’ desks. According to the 2024 Gartner AI Mandates for the Enterprise Survey, the majority of CIOs report they are organizing five or more AI projects, while 29% claim to be pursuing 10 or more.
- CIOs must vet each use case and determine whether to buy, blend or build the AI solutions for the ones they choose to pursue. This requires them to weigh several factors, including e xternal differentiation, compliance, security, vendor ecosystem, data, skills, short- and long-term costs and time to market.
- Strategic priorities for the use cases (characterized as defend, extend or upend) determine how important each key factor is when weighing which approach to take to develop AI solutions.

## Introduction

---

The shockwaves of the AI boom have grown more frequent, disrupting organizations as they scramble to augment people, products, services and ways of working with this rapidly developing technology. Respondents to Gartner’s 2024 AI Mandates for the Enterprise Survey report that the majority of their organizations are currently pursuing 5 or more AI projects, while 29% of respondents say their organizations are pursuing 10 or more.<sup>1</sup>

To make things more complex, the sheer prevalence and integration of AI across software and technology causes it to funnel into the organization from multiple sources, whether it’s built internally, bundled into software or bought through a vendor. Now CIOs — in collaboration with the C-suite — must sort through this newly \- grown AI jungle and carve out a tactical strategy for planning, implementing and managing AI. They should do this in a way that will transform its hype into measurable value.

This research provides CIOs with three strategic use \- case types (defend, extend and upend) that will define the AI project’s priorities. CIOs can then select the list of key factors and questions associated with that use case to determine whether to bu y, blend or build their AI solution (see Note 1). Table 1 breaks down the definitions of these three delivery approaches, as well as examples of each.

### Table 1: Buy, Blend and Build Definitions and Examples

<table><tbody><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>Delivery </span></span><span><span>a</span></span> <span><span>pproach</span></span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>Definition</span></span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>Examples</span></span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Buy</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Describes </span><span>acquiring commodity</span> <span>core systems, such as ERP, CRM, HR and industry-specific platforms like core banking or electronic health records systems</span><span>.</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>This can be either embedded AI, with AI features added, such as Microsoft Copilot or Oracle’s enterprise apps. It could also be from new vendors chosen for the specific areas in a </span><span>bring-your-own-AI</span> <span>(BYOAI) fashion.</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Blend</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Focuses on the creation of custom-made features and functionalities that are not available in off-the-shelf solutions, allowing organizations to </span><span>tailor their systems </span><span>to meet specific business requirements.</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>In AI, integrating GenAI foundation models (e.g., from OpenAI or Google) to custom interfaces or augmenting with domain-specific datasets in order to outperform generic applications but avoid the resource commitment of building. </span><span>For example, a CRM-native UI form can enable users to review, correct and rate the summaries before they are added to the customer record.</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Build</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>I</span> <span>nvolves building specific enhancements and integrating components to drive competitive differentiation and align the IT services more closely with the organization’s strategic objectives.</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Beginning with open source or other raw technology kernels and elements to originate AI-powered applications</span> <span>that are not entirely dependent on </span><span>other </span><span>existing applications, such as diagnostic aid for a medical specialist or an image recognition tool for a scientist.</span></span></p></td></tr></tbody><tbody><tr><td colspan="3"><p><span><span>Note:</span><span>These definitions are leveraged from other Gartner research on software engineering and AI delivery models.</span></span></p></td></tr></tbody></table>

Source: Gartner

## Analysis

---

### Decide Which Strategic Use Case Defines Your AI Project

Each AI project will fall under one of three main use case types:d efend, e xtend or u pend (see Table 2).

### Table 2: Gartner’s Three Use Case Types for AI

<table><tbody><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>Use Case</span></span> <span><span>Types</span></span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>Purpose</span></span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>Value</span></span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Defend</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Augments individual productivity to maintain competitive parity.</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Return on employee, such as improved well-being and employee NPS (e.g., enhanced office or coder productivity).</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Extend</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Transforms existing processes or teams for competitive differentiation.</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Return on investment, net present value (</span><span>NPV) and operating expenditure (</span><span>opex</span><span>), particularly in the near-term (e.g., </span><span>transformed claims process).</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Upend</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Disrupts by creating new value propositions, products or markets.</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Return on the future through strategic bet (e.g., AI-generated investment fund, drug discovery)</span> <span>or net</span> <span>-</span> <span>adjusted return rate.</span></span></p></td></tr></tbody><tbody><tr><td colspan="3"></td></tr></tbody></table>

Source: Gartner

  
It’s important to note that not every use case for AI will generate a monetary return. There are other forms of value that this technology offers that are equally valuable. Gartner’s three use \- case types highlight the unique value currencies AI may offer, whether it’s a return on employee (defend), return on investment or ROI (extend) or return on the future (upend).

- **Return on employee** (defend) refers to increases in individual productivity. This is typically done through AI tools that help augment tasks conducted by individual employees in order to save them time or increase employee satisfaction and intent-to-stay.
- **Return on investment** (extend) refers to traditional, monetary ROI by using AI to improve specific, preexisting, business \- outcome-driven metrics. Examples include targeted deployments using custom solutions implementing GenAI APIs and retrieval-augmented generation (RAG).
- **Return on the future** (upend) is a long-term strategic bet that uses AI to create a new business model via new products or markets and dramatic alteration of core processes. Simply put, it’s a gamble on the future. Although rare and often coupled with business and commercial risks, it can serve as a game-changing disruptor. Examples include leveraging AI for new drug discovery or to generate investment funds.

Identify the purpose of your AI project’s strategic use case. What do you intend to accomplish with it? What kind of return does it reap?

Once CIOs identify which of the three strategic use-case categories defines their AI project (see The 3 Business Cases of Generative AI Value), they can then use the associated table below to ask the questions that will help them decide whether to buy, blend or build their AI solutions.

### Weigh the Priorities of Your Use Case to Determine Whether to Buy, Blend or Build

The questions below will provide insight into the best development options for defend-based projects, extend-based projects and upend-based projects, but it isn’t a linear decision tree. Ultimately, CIOs must consider which direction their AI project leans based on their answers to these questions. Then they can weigh the benefits and risks gleaned from their answers and make the final call on how to proceed.

#### Weigh the Key Priorities for Defend-Based Projects

#### Buy, Blend or Build?

Building AI for a defend-based project is unwise as the effort is so much greater than acquiring it from a vendor who focuses on the general need. Blending would also be a rare pursuit since that AI will be tuned or adjusted using the organization’s data.

As an analogy, consider the use of special efforts to incorporate an organization’s specific vocabulary (e.g., acronyms, names) into its spell check facility. It’s unlikely that an organization will develop its own AI functionality at any level to acquire these features. Most tuning will be untested and take place during installation.

This leaves CIOs with the decision to “ b uy” in one of two ways:

- Through buyable “embedded” AI (such as a feature from an incumbent vendor)
- By allowing whoever needs the technology to bring an approved choice of AI (known as b ring- y our- o wn-AI or BYOAI)

Table 3 poses the key questions that help CIOs weigh priorities for this portfolio type in order to determine whether to b uy embedded AI or BYOAI.

- **If they respond “yes” to all of the questions:**T hey should go with embedded.
- **If they respond “no” to all of the questions:** T hey should go with a new AI vendor via a bring-your-own-AI (BYOAI) process in which IT and other key parties approve vendors for use with restrictions and guardrails.
- **If they say “** **y** **es” to some and “** **n** **o” to others:**T hey need to weigh the influence of each answer to make a final decision. Weights will vary depending on the organization’s cultures and goals

### Table 3: Questions to Evaluate Priorities for Defend-Based Projects

<table><tbody><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>Question</span></span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>Embedded</span></span> <span><span>in </span></span><span><span>i</span></span> <span><span>ncumbent</span></span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>BYOAI (AI </span></span><span><span>v</span></span> <span><span>endor new to org)</span></span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>Consideration</span></span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Is the use case conveniently addressed by an incumbent vendor in its offering?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Y</span> <span>es</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>N</span> <span>o</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Expect the incumbent ven</span> <span>dor</span> <span>to add the feature. Minimize customization. Integration to incumbent vendor offerings (even across such offerings) is a key factor in cost and manageability.</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Does the incumbent vendor with embedded AI beat the </strong><strong>n</strong> <strong>ew AI vendor leveraging your data</strong><strong>?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Y</span> <span>es</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>N</span> <span>o</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Most vendors in the embedded AI category sell their products to thousands of customers and either leverage that data or a subset of it (or even use synthetic data).</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Will all users of the incumbent solution benefit?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Y</span> <span>es</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>N</span> <span>o</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>If only power users will want this, minimize training and exposure through </span><span>BYOAI</span><span>. If everybody wants or will benefit from this, get it embedded in standard applications (if you can).</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Does the incumbent vendor meet compliance needs across policy, law and regulation?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Y</span> <span>es</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>N</span> <span>o</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Monitoring and testing for compliance will fall on the enterprise. Embedded vendors might be trusted already. BYOAI choices must be inspected.</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Does the incumbent vendor meet security needs?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Y</span> <span>es</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>N</span> <span>o</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>If pursuing BYOAI, special integration will be necessary and ongoing maintenance may be greater.</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Will the incumbent vendor ultimately fold this use case function into your existing relationship?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Y</span> <span>es</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>N</span> <span>o</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Are there opportunities for cost savings through bulk purchasing or strategic sourcing?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Y</span> <span>es</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>N</span> <span>o</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Procurement may be able to offer ways to activate what’s needed for a lower cost.</span></span></p></td></tr></tbody><tbody><tr><td colspan="4"></td></tr></tbody></table>

Source: Gartner

#### Weigh the Key Priorities for Extend-Based Projects

#### Buy, Blend or Build?

Buying embedded functions from incumbent vendors is an option for extend-based projects. However, it’s more difficult to justify a new and untested AI vendor here because such projects offer differentiation in an industry, which can lead to strategic advantage. Instead, organizations will want to pursue buying embedded AI capability for this use case, which implies a strategic contractual relationship between the vendor and the enterprise. Alternatively, they can create their own through either build or blend methods.

Buying embedded AI capabilities to support an extend-based project should include a vendor risk management process with a list of alternatives and a means of achieving an orderly transition in the event of a crisis. BYOAI lacks such assurances, making it unlikely to be an acceptable choice for features and capabilities that face customers or constituents.

##### When Do I Blend?

Blending is an attractive choice for “extend” features and projects because many of these efforts become a commoditized “defend” category with time. Blending enterprise-specific capabilities with more customizable commercial products is an effective way to deliver particular capabilities in a shorter period of time. Some of these projects will be retired as functionality becomes easier to acquire as an embedded function. A few may allow the enterprise to introduce a stopgap function with the intention of building a fuller solution later.

CIOs should u se the questions in Table 4 to evaluate whether buy or build/blend is the preferred method.

- **If an organization says “yes” to all of the questions:**T hey should go with buy.
- **If they say “no” to all of the questions:**T hey should go with a build or blend.
- **If they say “** **y** **es” to some and “** **n** **o” to others:**T hey need to weigh the influence of each answer to make a final decision. Weights will vary depending on the organization’s cultures and goals.

### Table 4: Questions to Evaluate Priorities for Extend-Based Projects

<table><tbody><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>Question</span></span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>Buy</span></span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>Blend</span></span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>Build</span></span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>Consideration</span></span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Does your organization lack the skills to build?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Y</span> <span>es</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>No</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>No</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>If the capability offers a long-term advantage, developing the skills </span><span>— either through building on the enterprise’s existing skills or using a service partner will be more valuable than seeking a quick win through buying an off-the-shelf solution.</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Does this use case offer no more than minor differentiation in your market?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span><span><br></span><span>(it does not differentiate us)</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>No</span><span><br></span><span>(this sets us apart)</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>No</span><span><br></span><span>(this sets us apart)</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Organizations who wager their future on an improvement must carefully weigh the possibility </span><span>that in the future they may lose </span><span>the speed to market, cost benefits and other preferable circumstances that buying offers</span><span>. Remember examples like </span><span>companies who bet on video streaming standards that were abandoned, employed search products that were deprecated or invested in blockchain mechanisms that were profoundly changed.</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Is using an incumbent vendor’s solution </strong><strong>cheaper </strong><strong>than building your own?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>No</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>If the incumbent vendor’s feature is critical to an enterprise’s success then it may still make sense to buy initially and then switch to something internally developed in the future. If not, then it may never need to be built and vendor selections can be switched.</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Is the</strong> <strong>upfront cost of building in order to achieve freedom from future price hikes too high to justify?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>No</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Beware </span><span>of the temptation to buy</span> <span>to avoid high upfront build costs only to spend as much or more on subscription or license fees in the future. Switching vendors could also cost more in the future.</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Does your incumbent vendor offer the use case you need right now?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>No</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>No</span><span>, </span><em>but…</em></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>If this improvement is urgent to meet rivals’ offerings or to satisfy customers, then buying may be wiser, but the long-term risks are key differentiators. For example, if a vendor may be unreliable, it may be necessary to explore the cost/risk of building an alternative.</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Does your incumbent vendor’s performance eliminate the advantage of using your own data?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span><span>, </span><em>but…</em></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>No</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Consider whether performance will improve so much from employing your own data that building is worth the cost, effort and long-term expense. Keep in mind that “</span> <span>e</span> <span>xtend” designations offer the possibility that a use case’s performance will continue to improve over time, and that an organization’s control over model improvement and rebuilding schedules offer enough advantage to defray the cost.</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Does the incumbent vendor meet policy, law and regulation compliance needs?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span><span>, </span><em>but</em> <span>…</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>No</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Meaningful advantage must not bring excessive compliance risks with the variety of AI transparency, predictability and usage standards and mandates that are emerging internationally. Some vendors cannot keep up with and indemnify enterprises from changes that occur over time. Maintaining compliance can be expensive but it may be necessary for key features.</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Does the incumbent vendor meet security needs?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>No</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Vendors who have proven they meet security standards may present a lower opportunity cost than building.</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Can the solution be successfully adopted without undergoing complex integration?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>N</span> <span>o</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>No</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Integration to incumbent vendor offerings (even across such offerings) is a key factor in cost and manageability.</span></span></p></td></tr></tbody><tbody><tr><td colspan="5"></td></tr></tbody></table>

Source: Gartner

#### Weigh the Key Priorities for Upend-Based Projects

#### Buy, Blend or Build?

Upend projects will typically be built. Tactical vendors without long-term relationships don’t offer the resiliency to support ecosystem-altering impacts for the long term.

Due to the potential strategic value of upend element s, these projects are appropriate for blending when it mitigates the buying risks listed in the table below. However, blending demands vigilant vendor risk management, and so CIOs should weigh the buy and blend options below before considering it.

Table 5 offers a series of questions to help weigh the priorities for u pend portfolios:

- I **f an organization says “yes” to all of the questions:** They should go with buy.
- **If they say “no” to all of the questions:** They should go with a build or blend.
- **If they say “Yes” to some and “No” to others:** They need to weigh the influence of each answer to make a final decision. Weights will vary depending on the organization’s cultures and goals.

### Table 5: Questions to Evaluate Priorities for Upend-Based Projects

<table><tbody><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>Question</span></span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>Buy</span></span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>Blend</span></span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>Build</span></span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span><span>Consideration</span></span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Do you need to get to market immediately?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Y</span> <span>es</span><span>,</span><em> but…</em></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>N</span> <span>o</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Buying in this category may be</span> <span>temp</span> <span>orary.</span><span> Sometimes, a product or service must be available immediately to deliver its greatest impact. In this case, the purchase partner must either be perfectly reliable or there mu</span> <span>st be a contingency plan in place to swap it for a rival- or self-developed solution.</span><span>Organizations must have a fallback plan, if possible. If an organization can switch to a self-developed solution, such an investment is urgent.</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Is there a vendor, a backup vendor and a backup, backup vendor?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>No</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Redundancy and resiliency depend on the ability to </span><span>summon aid</span> <span>from an auxiliary source as well as an additional backup. An upend project demands such buttressing. Without the ability to save a major project by turning to a new vendor with minimum loss of value, a built solution may be worth building and maintaining.</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Does the vendor have access to data you cannot match?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span><span>, </span><em>but…</em></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>No</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>The data used to build and improve models is the golden element of AI features and offerings. When an organization seeks to disrupt its industry, access to such data is central to its success.</span><span> If a vendor has access to data the organization does not, then the organization is unlikely to develop unique and defensible disruptions. This will dilute the project’s distinctions unless the enterprise can develop its own advantageous data after the early phases of launch.</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Does the vendor have access to skills you lack?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span><span>, </span><em>and…</em></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>No</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>No</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>To achieve swift time to market, a vendor or service provider may have access to skills that an organization cannot hope to develop on its own. However, in the long term, an organization must have a plan to build those skills or its disrupting effort cannot endure.</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Does the vendor wield robust and necessary knowledge of compliance in the geographies where you intend to do business while using it?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span><span>, </span><em>but…</em></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>No</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Disruptions may be viewed as existential challenges by governments, who have systems in place to manage conventional systems, not new ones (e.g., the emergence of ride</span> <span>-</span> <span>sharing). A vendor that intends to maintain and manage its response to such laws and regulations, even as they shift, can be selected. One that does not will present unacceptable risk to any organization intending to change its ecosystem.</span></span></p></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1"><p><span><strong>Is the vendor aligned to the organization’s security standards for the core business?</strong></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span><span>, </span><em>but…</em></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Yes</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>No</span></span></p></td><td colspan="1"><p><span><span>Because projects in this category will carry the business’ future, security is paramount. The efforts will be a target for external bad actors and failure could have material impact.</span></span></p></td></tr></tbody><tbody><tr><td colspan="5"></td></tr></tbody></table>

Source: Gartner

## Evidence

---

<sup>1 </sup> **2024 Gartner AI Mandates for the Ente** **rprise Survey.**This study was conducted to understand how AI and generative AI (GenAI) are being adopted by enterprises, focusing on areas such as AI strategy, data, governance, literacy, engineering, organization, portfolio and value, to assist clients in keeping pace with AI’s rapid evolution. The research was conducted online from October through December 2024 among 432 respondents from the U.S. (n = 181), the U.K. (n = 70), France (n = 50), Germany (n = 50), India (n = 51) and Japan (n = 30). Quotas were established for company sizes and for industries to ensure a good representation across the sample. Organizations were required to have deployed at least one AI use case in production. Respondents were screened for C-level executives (e.g., chief AI officer, chief data officer, chief data scientist, chief digital officer, chief information officer, chief operating officer, chief technology officer or equivalent) or roles above vice presidents. All respondents were required to have high involvement in at least one AI initiative. Disclaimer: The results of this survey do not represent global findings or the market as a whole, but reflect the sentiments of the respondents and companies surveyed.

## Note 1: Nine Factors for Choosing Buy, Blend or Build for AI

---

There are nine influential factors that CIOs must consider when deciding whether to buy, blend or build AI:

- **External differentiation:** The degree to which an AI solution will differentiate an organization and/or its products/services from its competition.
- **Compliance:** An AI solution’s (or vendor’s) ability to meet the legal and regulatory requirements set by various laws and policies.
- **Security:** The level of risk and safety involved with the pursued AI solution.
- **Vendor ecosystem:** The diversity and stability of the current vendor environment for the use case.
- **Data:** The data necessary to fuel AI’s operation and development that will influence its level of accuracy and capability.
- **Skills:** The human knowledge and capabilities necessary to address the use case from an engineering and employment perspective.
- **Short-term costs:** The immediate costs of implementing the AI software via buy, blend or build methods.
- **Long-term costs:** The long-term costs incurred to maintain AI software.
- **Impact on workers:** The positive or negative impact AI software will have on employee productivity and satisfaction.
- **Time to market:** The speed in which AI software is implemented and made operational.

The level of priority each factor assumes will vary depending on whether its purpose is to defend, extend or upend. In all cases, organizations may discard some factors and add their own — but beware of the cost of complexity. The more factors involved in the earliest phase of decision making, the longer each decision will take.

#### Have questions? Try AskGartnerBETA

Get faster answers from trusted Gartner sources with our **generative AI research assistant**.